---
layout: post
Title: HackNC Reflection
category: inls161
---

For my second community event I attended my first [hackathon](https://hacknc.com/)! I was nervous before attending, 
and almost didn't get out of bed on Saturday morning to check in before the opening ceremony. Pre-concieved 
ideas about hackathons and about myself weren't matching up. Plus, I had _so much_ school work to do, and I'd miss
a Halloween party with friends that night. Finally I used the "you'll regret it if you don't at least check it out" argument
and ended up feeling lost and out of place in a gym full of people already teamed up and immersed in planning their project. 

My one critique of HackNC is the team building part. The process works fine for people who have a team in advance, but for 
those who don't the team building session happened 2 hours after check in. I think
it would have been beneficial to direct people without a team at checkin to a concentrated area so we could start meeting people
and forming teams. As it was, I was unleashed in the two massive gyms in Fetzer with no direction and two free hours to 
spend doing ???. 

I spotted a girl looking as lost as I felt and quickly befriended her. Then during the team building session we
added two more noobies to our team with a general plan of building "something using a map with a strong user interface and 
related to civic engagement". None of us had been to a hackathon, and our combined programming skills amounted to some Java, 
some Python, HTML and CSS, what I've learned about GitHub and Jekyll in INLS 161, and the ability to Google. We didn't 
complete our project, didn't even have a minimum viable product to submit in the end, and had a great time doing it.

Our project was a web application for submitting infrastructure maintenance needs to the local government. In theory, citizens 
could pull up the website to drop a pin on a city map reporting where the problem was, add relevant notes or comments, and 
optionally leave an email if they wanted follow up. Upon form submission, the form would automatically send to the City of 
Chapel Hill email address for this purpose (we made a dummy email address for the hackathon) and the data would be stored and 
mapped in a heatmap layer onto a map on another page of the website. The heatmap would show areas that most need attention
and allow efficient allocation of government resources to improve community infrastructure where it is most needed.

We could have written gold metal-quality Vision and Scope document and Systems Requirements plan for Trashphalt (potholes >> this street 
is trash >> Trashphalt). But actually building this system turned out to be wayyyy too much to tackle for four novices in
under 24 hours. 

Here's a list of the things that I tried to learn:
- [Esri](http://www.esri.com/)'s [ArcGIS for Developers](https://developers.arcgis.com/) JavaScript API library
- Google Maps API when I gave up on the ArcGIS API
- Ruby on Rails for building the site
- Amazon Web Services for hosting
- Bootstrap templates for building the site when Ruby on Rails was nixed
- mySQL database for storing and mapping data
- PHP mixed into HTML for building a form that could accept input user input

The entire thing was an uphill battle. Lots of dead ends, revising the plan, and more dead ends. Everything we read to answer 
some questions only introduced us to more that we didn't understand. It was definitely frustrating, but my team had 
a positive attitude and we were all just proud of ourselves for showing up and trying.

I attended a couple workshops throughout the hackathon and would be lying if I said I learned much.  
_Ruby on Rails: 0 to 60 in 30 Minutes_ definitely felt more like 50 to 60, or 0 to 0. _Intro to ArcGIS for Developers_ 
was interesting, but intro level for someone with experience programming with APIs. My team stopped attending 'intro to x' 
workshops after that. 

[Gary Bishop](https://www.cs.unc.edu/~gb/) presented on his two accessible web apps for people with Cerebral
Palsy -- [Tar Heel Reader](http://tarheelreader.org/) and [Tar Heel GamePlay](http://tarheelgameplay.org/).
Both applications limit the degrees of freedom to just one or two choices, so people with limited mobility and speech abilities 
can read and play games independently. The apps use open source images from Flickr and videos from YouTube to enable users to 
create their own books and games about what they find interesting. Gary's talk was called was called 
_Think, Type, and Magic Happens_, and that basic idea is why I'm interested in programming. I think it's so 
cool that I can think of something, and then make it come to life (assuming I can figure out what all the complicated 
documentation means, or if I just find someone who does). 

Around 10 Saturday night, after ~11 hours of trying to hack, my team decided to give up. Before heading home, we had a 
reflection session about our accomplishments so we didn't leave feeling like total losers. 
Here are some of my accomplishments and take-aways:

- I now know what an API is, still unsure about how to successfully use one.
- I taught two of my teammates how to use GitHub and we were all successfully branching, committing, and merging by the time we left. 
- I showed up to my first Hackathon and it's not a scary, pro-computer-geek-only event!
- I learned about GitHub gist and how to use it
- We participated in a cup-stacking tournament (& were eliminated round 1) but it was fun.
- Next time it would help to clearly define roles for each project member and break up the tasks. 
- And maybe start with project more suited to the team's skill level.

I returned the next morning to see the completed projects, and it was awesome seeing teams show off what they had made. 
I liked hearing how they projects worked under the surface, and realized I understood just a little bit more of 
what they were talking about than I would have 24 hours previously. 

I was devastated to learn that the scheduled "Capture the Flag" game referred to an online cybersecurity 
game, but otherwise I had a great first experience and am looking forward to Pearl Hacks in the spring. 

